- Render the document first, before making any changes, as good practice. This confirms
  there are no pre-existing errors so you know the starting document is sound (and if there
  are errors, they aren't your fault).
- Understand the document structure before editing: the YAML metadata at the top (just a
  title here), a first-level "Introduction" heading describing the dataset, a "Packages"
  section that loads tidyverse (wrangling/visualization), scales (pretty axis labels), DT
  (an interactive data table for looking up how a country is spelled), and unvotes (bundles
  UN voting data). A later chunk joins several data frames into a single `unvotes` data
  frame, and the final chunk produces the visualization (year on x-axis, percent "yes"
  votes on y-axis, one colored line/point series per country, faceted by issue).
- Decide where in the pipeline the edit belongs: the change happens in the data-preparation
  stage (the `filter()` step), not in the plotting (`ggplot`) stage.
- In the `filter()` call, replace a country with one of your choice; in the video, Turkey is
  replaced with France:
  c("United Kingdom", "United States", "Turkey") becomes
  c("United Kingdom", "United States", "France").
- Render again to confirm the change propagated through the pipeline into the visualization
  (the red series now represents France instead of Turkey).
- Pop output from Viewer to a browser window.

## Complete script from the old video

Hello, and welcome to the first code along.
Our first code along is called UN Vote.
So open up your file called UN Votes.
And let's take a look at what's in there.
All each of these code alongs are
going to be structured somewhat similarly.
An introduction where we say
a little bit about the dataset
that we're going to be working with,
load some packages, load the dataset itself,
and then we go on to running
different analyses and talking through it.
So in this particular analysis,
we're going to look at how countries vote in
the United Nations General Assembly and
how their voting patterns have evolved throughout time.
And how similarly, or
differently do they view certain issues?
We're going to try to answer these questions at a very,
very high level, and we're
going to throw a bunch of code at you.
Really the challenge for this code
along is to be able to look at a bunch of code
and try to figure out what is
the one little update you
might need to do to get what you need out of it.
So let's go ahead and
start by first rendering our document.
It's always good practice when you open
a new corto document that has been provided
to you with some code on hand
to go ahead and render it before you even touch it.
This makes sure that there are
no errors that persist in
the document before you even get started.
Because if there are, you know, that's not your fault,
and you can go back and try to figure that
out or go to the person who provided
the corto document for you and ask
them questions before you even get started.
We can see that in our quarto document, on top,
we have this area called Yamel,
where we have some metadata about our analysis.
We just have a title for this one,
and when we render it,
we can see that it is formatted a particular way.
The rest of the document looks
very different between the source code,
that is the QMD file and the output,
the HTML file, except when we get to the code chunks.
So we're going to talk about
those code chunks in a second.
So I have a first level heading introduction where we
talk through a little bit
about the introduction that I just gave you.
And then we have a second level heading packages,
and it has a code chunk in it that
loads the packages that we're
going to use for this analysis.
Remember, I said we're going to
throw a bunch of code at you, well,
we're going to throw a bunch of packages at you as well,
some of which I haven't
even introduced in the course yet.
So the first package should be one that's familiar,
the tidy verse package for
data wrangling and visualization,
the scales package for making pretty access labels.
The DT package creates an interactive data table.
So if you scroll to the very bottom of your a document.
At some point, I'm going to
be asking you to come out with
a country that you might want to visualize yourself.
And if you want to check to see how exactly
that country is spelled in your document, for example,
Congo tends to be a country that might be
spelled differently in different resources,
so you can go ahead and use
that interactive data table to
filter for that country so you can
decide how you need to spell it in your code.
And finally, the UN votes package is
a package that bundles information
on how countries vote in
the United Nations into
a data frame that is distributed within this package.
The package is updated somewhat regularly,
so this is a recent ish dataset
that we're going to be working with.
Here, it says that the data we're using
originally came from this UN votes package.
And in the chunk below,
we modify the data by joining
various data frames provided in the package.
Joining data frames is something you're going to
learn more about in the class.
But for now, just think about it as I have some data,
and I have some additional information
about these countries that I have data on,
and I want to slop all of that up into
creating a single data frame called UN votes.
And then we have another code chunk
here that if I scroll in my output,
ultimately produces a visualization.
And this is the visualization that
is the point of this code along.
We can see that in this visualization,
let me pop this out a little bit,
and let's go ahead and zoom in on it.
See that on the x axis, we have a year.
We have some data over time.
On the y axis,
we have percentage of yes votes.
For each of the countries that are a plotted,
in this case, the countries that are aplotted are Turkey,
where I'm originally from United Kingdom,
where I've lived for a few years,
and United States, where I'm currently living now.
These are all represented by
different colored lines and points.
We're looking to see what percent
of the time did they vote
yes in UN resolutions that are on particular topics.
The topics are issues,
as they're referred to in the dataset, are colonialism.
Rms control and disarmament, economic development,
human rights, Palestinian conflict,
and nuclear weapons and nuclear material.
Something important to note
is yes doesn't necessarily mean,
I agree or I disagree.
We don't know at this point in
time what the content of
the resolutions they're voting yes are.
It could be yes for colonialism
or yes, for stopping colonialism.
So we don't have that information, though,
if you have some political knowledge and
some understanding of how
these countries vote today or
historically have voted in these issues.
You might be able to get a sense
of what those resolutions were saying,
but it's just important to note that
this is not necessarily the full picture.
Some of the things we can see is that
while for arms control and disarmament,
these three countries seem to be
voting somewhat in harmony over time.
On other issues like colonialism or Palestinian conflict,
the way they have voted have
changed over the years and diverged from one another.
And here is the challenge.
Let's close this up.
Go back to the code,
and taking a look at this code,
that seems to be doing a lot
of stuff that you haven't yet learned.
The challenge is to replace
the country Turkey or one of the other countries,
if you want, with a country of your choice.
The goal is to figure out
without understanding all of the code here,
is it possible to make
a modification and get what you need out of this?
If it is that we want to replace one of the countries,
the first question you want to ask yourself is,
where in this pipeline would I be making an adjustment?
Is it going to be once I start making the plot?
So starting with GG plot or lower,
or is it going to be earlier than that
in the pipeline where I'm preparing my dataset?
Well, where we're preparing our dataset,
it appears that we start with
that join dataset that
we created in an earlier code chunk,
and then we are filtering,
which is a function you haven't learned yet,
but perhaps can guess what it means.
For some countries,
here's another operator you haven't learned yet.
But it seems to list
the three countries that we actually have plotted.
So if I wanted to replace this with another country,
how would I go about it?
Let's go ahead and replace
Turkey with another country
that happens to pop into my mind.
And in order to recreate our visualization,
we go ahead and click Render again.
When you click Render, if
the result isn't showing up in this viewer pane,
but it's popping up as a pop up window.
You can click on the gear icon next to the Render button.
And that probably means
that you have preview in Window selected.
You can go back and select preview in
viewer pane if you like seeing
your input and your output next to each other.
If you happen to have a much smaller screen,
you may not prefer this,
and you may prefer the preview in Window option.
So I'm going to pop this out one more time,
so we can zoom in and look at
the visualization a little bit more closely.
We can see that, in fact,
the adjustment that we made to our code has
propagated through the code itself
and has made its way onto our visualization.
We're still using the same three colors, but this time,
we have the red color
representing France instead of Turkey,
and we can see how the voting patterns,
in this case of France and United Kingdom,
seem to be much similar,
for example, when it comes to resolutions on
the Palestinian conflict compared
to how Turkey voted on these issues.
So In this brief code along,
what we managed to do was to open up a quarto document,
render our quarto document,
change how we might view the output in
a pop up window or in
the viewer pane next to our document.
And write some code and create
your first data visualization with R without really
learning a whole lot of R. But
with learning to have the confidence to play
around with the code that has already been
provided for you and rendering
again to see if what you
expect might happen actually
happens when you run the code.
