- Understand the goal and data before editing: investigate flight delays using the tidyverse
  package (wrangling/visualization) and the nycflights13 package, which holds all flights in
  2013 out of the three NYC airports (LaGuardia, JFK, Newark).
- Load the packages (via the play button) and `glimpse(flights)` to see the data. Optionally
  set chunk output to console (gear icon) and rearrange the RStudio panes so the prompt and
  results sit side by side.
- Fill in the two fill-in-the-blank sentences. Rather than hard-coding the row count (which
  invites copy/paste typos and won't update if the data changes), use inline R code so the
  document stays reproducible:
    - Replace "has \_\_\_ rows" with an inline R expression: has `r nrow(flights)` rows.
    - Replace "Each row represents a \_\_\_." with "Each row represents a flight out of one
      of three NYC airports in 2013."
- Replace each `# add code here` placeholder with the corresponding dplyr code. Concepts the
  video emphasizes are noted alongside each:
    - Column names:            names(flights)   (19 variables; full codebook via ?flights)
    - Select two columns:      flights |> select(dep_delay, arr_delay)
    - Drop a column:           flights |> select(!dep_delay)   (! negates; 18 columns remain)
    - Select a range:          flights |> select(year:dep_delay)   (: is the range operator)
    - Select by pattern:       flights |> select(contains("arr_"))
                                 (select helpers: also starts_with(), ends_with())
    - First 5 rows:            flights |> slice(1:5)
    - Last 2 rows:             flights |> slice_tail(n = 2)
                                 (more robust than hard-coding row numbers; press Tab after
                                  slice to see slice_* variants and their packages)
    - Sort by dep_delay:       flights |> arrange(dep_delay)
                                 (min is -43, i.e. took off 43 min early)
    - Sort descending:         flights |> arrange(desc(dep_delay))
                                 (max is 1,301 min, almost 22 hours)
    - Most delayed flight:     flights |> arrange(desc(dep_delay)) |>
                                 slice_head(n = 1) |>
                                 select(tailnum, carrier, dep_delay)
    - Filter to RDU:           flights |> filter(dest == "RDU")
                                 (filter keeps rows where a condition is TRUE; see the logical
                                  operators cheat sheet: ==, !=, %in%, <, >=, etc.)
    - RDU + early arrival:     flights |> filter(dest == "RDU" & arr_delay < 0)
                                 (4,232 flights)
    - Count destinations:      flights |> count(dest, sort = TRUE)
                                 (105 destinations; without sort they're alphabetical, with
                                  sort = TRUE they're in descending count order)
    - Count by month, sorted:  flights |> count(month) |> arrange(n)
                                 (February has the fewest flights)
    - Count month/day:         flights |> count(month, day, sort = TRUE)
                                 (most flights on November 27, likely Thanksgiving travel)
    - Add speed columns:       flights |> mutate(
                                 air_time_hr = air_time / 60,
                                 mph = distance / air_time_hr
                               )
                                 (relocate() helps view new columns; consolidate the two
                                  mutates into a single call for readability)
    - Proportion in July:      flights |> count(month) |>
                                 mutate(prop = n / sum(n)) |>
                                 filter(month == 7)
                                 (8.74% of flights are in July)
    - Mean arrival delay:      flights |> summarize(
                                 mean_arr_delay = mean(arr_delay, na.rm = TRUE)
                               )
                                 (na.rm = TRUE is needed because of NAs; name the summary
                                  column rather than leaving the default long name)
    - Mean arr delay by month: flights |> group_by(month) |>
                                 summarize(mean_arr_delay = mean(arr_delay, na.rm = TRUE))
                                 (group_by applies the next step once per group; 12 groups)
    - Median dep delay/origin: flights |> group_by(origin) |>
                                 summarize(median_dep_delay = median(dep_delay, na.rm = TRUE))
- Fill in the short-answer prompts:
    - Replace "Add your response here." with "Flight took off 43 minutes earlier than it
      was scheduled."
    - Replace "Add response here." with a plain-language reading of the pipeline: start
      with the flights data frame, then filter for rows where destination is RDU or GSO
      and arrival delay or departure delay is less than 0. (This more complex filter matches
      6,203 flights.)
- Concept to note throughout: the pipe operator (|>) takes the result of the previous step
  and passes it as the first argument to the next function, letting you build a pipeline like
  building blocks.

## Complete script from the old video

In this code along, we're going
to work with flights and pipes.
What do I mean by that?
Well, if you've ever flown,
chances are you may have been a
little bit delayed, but how common is that?
How common is it for your flight to be delayed?
Or are there some airlines that
tend to be more delayed than others?
We're going to work with the tidyverse package as
usual for doing our data wrangling and visualization,
and also use the nycflights13 package which
has data on all of
the flights out of New York City airports.
There are three airports in New York City,
LaGuardia, John F. Kennedy, and Newark.
All of the flights from these airports to
any destination in year 2013.
Let's go ahead and load these packages.
Once again, one of them is actually for doing
our data wrangling and visualization,
and the other one is for the data.
I'm loading the packages by clicking on
the little Play button in
my Quarto document to run that current chunk.
Then let's take a look at the flights dataset.
The function we're going to use that we've
introduced before as well is glimpse.
Here we go. We can see
that our results are printed on our screen.
In my Quarto document,
what I'm going to do is I'm actually going to
change where my results are printed.
I'm going to close this output and say,
I would like my chunk output in console.
I'll say remove any of the existing output.
Then let's go ahead and run that chunk of code
to actually see our results in the console
just because it's a little bit easier to see
our questions in one place
and our answers in another place.
Another thing I'll mention about RStudio is that you
actually have control over where these panes are located.
I could go ahead and click on this little icon that has
four panes on it and say that
I would like to change the layout of my panes.
I'm actually going to say,
I would like to see my console here on the upper right,
say "Apply" and hit "OK".
Going forward when I run the code,
we'll be able to see the results on one side of
the screen and see our prompt on
the other side of the screen, which might be nice.
This may not be your preferred arrangement for things.
If that's the case, you can change them
around to whatever you like them to be.
Let's go ahead and start exploring our flights dataset.
It says, fill in the blanks,
the flights data frame has
so many rows and each row represents something.
How could we figure out how many rows there are?
Well, if I take a look at my glimpse output,
I can see that there are 336,776 flights.
It's a lot of flights,
and that's all of the flights out of
these three airports in that one year.
One thing I could do is copy
this number and paste it into here.
Let's go ahead and actually
write out what each row represents.
Each row represents a flight out of one of
three New York City airports in 2013.
The thing is one of the things we've done
here is we looked at the output of the code,
and then we grabbed
some information from that output
and copied and pasted that into our document.
When you're working in a computational document
like a Quarto document,
you actually don't need to do that copy and paste,
which means that you also
remove any potential of errors along the way.
Because if instead of copying and pasting,
if I was just typing these numbers,
it would be pretty easy to accidentally
make a mistake like this and have a typo, for example.
Instead of hard coding numbers like
this that we can computationally generate,
we can actually go back and say,
is there a way for us to
embed the code into our document?
Now, when we ran the glimpse function
to get a look at all of our data,
which not only tells us how many rows and
columns we have but also what all those columns are,
we were able to grab
this one piece of information from the output,
but I can also use a function like
nrow which will give me exactly that number that I need.
Now that I know what that function is that gives
me exactly the number I need, I can say,
I would like to insert an inline code chunk and in there,
I would like to write the code nrow(flights).
I use my insert anything tool to insert this code chunk.
What's happening here is that I'm
seeing that the computational language I'm using is R,
and then I'm giving the code that I want to run in there.
You can imagine with inline code chunks,
you don't want to write very extensive code,
code that would need to span multiple lines or
anything but something simple like this works nicely.
When I render my document,
you can't even tell that there was code underneath it.
But the neat thing about this approach is
that if my data was to change at any point,
or if I do this analysis for 2013 data,
and then I happen to get data for a more recent year,
I can still run my code and all of
these numbers will be updated based on the new data set.
The next question asks,
what are the names of the variables in flights?
In order to get the names of the variables,
the function that I would use is names,
and let's do names(flights).
I can again, do run one code chunk at a time,
which would print my results in my console,
or I can say that I want to
render my document so that I can
see exactly what that looks like in my complete document.
We saw that there were 19 variables in this dataset,
and we can see that they're things
like each of them should say year 2013,
but different month and
day of the flight, their departure time,
if there was any delays at
departure or if there was any delays at arrival,
so on and so forth.
If you want to see a full description
of each of the variables,
we can take a look at the code book.
Since this dataset is distributed from a package,
I can do things like
question mark and the name of the data frame,
or I can just go to my Help
menu and just search for flights there.
Either way, it will bring up this documentation for
the data frame which has
the description of each one of my variables.
Next up, we're going to go through a set of exercises
where we use one or two functions from the tidyverse,
specifically from the dplyr package for data wrangling.
The first question says,
make a data frame that only contains the variables,
dep_delay, and arr_delay,
so departure or arrival delay.
For each one of these, I start with
my data frame flights,
and then I pipe that
into because I want to select only certain columns,
I'm going to use the select variable,
and the names of the variables are dep_delay.
I can use the auto complete here, arrival delay.
This will give me a data frame
with the same number of rows as before,
but only the columns that I need.
If I want to instead make a data frame that
keeps every variable except departure delay,
instead of listing all of
the other 18 variables I can take
a short cut and indicate that
the only thing I don't want is depth delay.
In order to do that, once again,
start with the data frame name
and then say select(!dep_delay).
We use exclamation point to negate things
in R. We're saying everything but departure delay,
and you can see that
the result is 18 columns in our dataset,
still the same number of rows.
Next, we want to make a data frame that includes
all variables between year
through departure delay inclusive.
That's starting with year through departure delay.
Oh, I guess I can't see
my departure delay variable there.
Maybe I can take a look at it here,
so it should be year through departure delay.
Those should be the variables that I want.
These are all of the variables.
It says that provide information
about the departure of each flight.
We'll start with the flights data frame again,
and then say, select.
I want everything from year to departure delay.
The operator I use for that is the colon operator.
Here we go. We have a result of six variables,
still the same number of rows.
Each one of these actions we're doing with
a select function is
operating on the columns and doing nothing on the row,
so my number of row stays constant.
Finally, with select, we're going to do one more thing.
We want to select the variables
associated with the arrival.
These are all of the variables that contain
the string arr_ in the name.
I could take a look back at the output of names,
and I could say there's arrival time,
there's scheduled arrival time and arrival delay,
and I could write those out one by one,
but you can imagine that if I had
a much larger dataset or many more variables to write,
that's not necessarily going to be handy to do so.
Instead with the select function,
I can also use some select helpers.
I will say, I want to select for
variables that contains arr_ in their names.
These are all of those variables.
There are other select helpers that we can use.
For example, if I had used starts with,
I would end up with just arrival time and arrival delay.
If I had used ends with,
I end up with nothing because none of these actually end
with the text string arr_.
Contains is a neat way of doing.
It doesn't matter where
that appears in the variables name.
As long as that is included in the name,
I would like to select that.
So far we've operated on the columns now,
let's operate on the rows with slice.
It says, display the first five rows
of the flight data frame.
We'll do flights,
and then slice 1-5.
Now we keep all of the columns,
but only the top five rows of our data frame.
Next, we're asked to display
the last two rows of the flights data frame.
In order to do that, I would start with flights.
Then I could use the same approach,
I can say slice,
and then I can figure out myself what
the indicators for the last two rows are going to be.
I know that I have this many,
336,766 rows in my data frame.
I can say, give me
everything up to that row and one before that.
So 336,775-336,776.
This works. But unfortunately,
what I've done here is I've once again used the result of
an output that I had and hard-coded numbers into my code.
Instead of that, I could try to leverage R to
find the number of rows for me along the way.
In order to be able to do that, once I type slice,
I'm going to click on the tab on my keyboard so that
RStudio gives me some options
of variance of the slice function that I can choose from.
I can see the names of
the functions and also which package they come from,
so that can help me limit.
I know that I'm going to use something from
the dplyr package and slice tail
is what we want since
that's going to give us the last so many rows.
In this case, we would say
we would like the last two rows,
and we can see that we arrive at the same answer.
But the second way of doing this is a bit more robust.
If my dataset was to change,
I would still be able to
get the last two rows with this code.
We've operated on the columns
by selecting or omitting some of them.
We've operated on the rows
by selecting or omitting some of them.
Now we're going to arrange our rows.
We're not going to be reducing our data frame in any way,
but we're going to be changing the order.
For example, the first exercise says,
let's arrange the data by departure delay so the flights
with the shortest departure delays
will be at top of the data frame.
Once again, starts with flights,
and then we say arrange departure delay,
and let's go ahead and run that.
We can see that the shortest departure delay
is -43 minutes,
that means that flight actually took off
43 minutes earlier than it was scheduled to,
which is the answer here.
Flight took off 43 minutes earlier than it was scheduled.
Next, we're asked to arrange the data by descending
departure delay so the flights with
the longest departure delays will be at the top.
Let's go ahead and copy the code,
we know is good and working but
we're going to add another function into this and say,
we actually want these to be in descending order.
The flight with the longest departure delay
is 1,301 minutes.
How many hours does that make?
Let's divide that by 60 real quick to get a sense.
That flight was delayed by almost 22 hours.
Really, really long departure time.
Next, we're asked to create
a data frame that only includes
the plane tail number and the carrier and
departure delay for the flight
with the longest departure delay,
and so that we can identify
what the plane tail number for this flight was.
We know how to get
the flight with the longest departure delay.
If we were to use the code we ran before,
that's going to put the flight with
the longest departure delay on top.
We also know how to
slice our data frame for the very first row.
I can do this with slice(1),
or I can do this with
slice_head(n = 1) to get the top row.
Then we also know how to select variables.
It says, we want to select for a tail number,
carrier, and the departure delay.
We were able to chain
the things that we've learned so far,
the different functions by adding
the pipe operator in between each one of our lines.
We're saying start with the flights data frame and
then arrange in descending order of departure delay,
and then slice the data frame for
the top one row and then select these three variables.
The plane with the tail number is printed here,
and the carrier shortcode is printed here as well.
Next, let's move on to filtering.
We have arranged our rows.
We've also sliced the data frame
based on an index number,
but we can also filter based on a particular condition.
For example, filter all rows
where the destination airport is RDU,
so that is flights,
and then we want to filter
for destination is equal to RDU.
The filter function will
choose rows based on a condition being true.
In order to check for that condition,
we use what we call logical operators in R. I've
included a little cheat sheet of
logical operators in this code along as well.
The double equals basically asks,
is it exactly equal to?
We have other options,
like, is it not equal to?
Is it one thing or another?
Or we can also do mathematical operations
with mathematical operators like less than,
greater than or equal to,
so on and so forth, as well.
In this case, we would articulate this
as take the flights data frame and then
filter for rows where destination is equal to RDU.
We can also filter all rows
where the destination airport is
RDU and arrival delay is less than zero.
Let's go ahead and grab the code
we know is good and working.
We can say and arrival delay is less than zero.
That is 4,232 flights
from one of the three New York City airports
to RDU where they were not delayed.
The arrival delay was less than zero.
Finally, it says, describe what the code is
doing in words. Let's take a look.
Here we're saying, start with
the flights data frame and then we want to
filter for something and another thing.
We can use either a coma operator
or the M percent to say and.
We're looking for two conditions to hold.
The first one says the destination should be in here.
This in operator allows us to check
for not for exactly equal to,
but basically saying either the destination is
RDU or the destination is GSO, another airport code.
The other condition we're looking for is
the arrival delay is less than zero,
or the departure delay is less than zero.
To articulate this, we can say,
start with the flights data frame,
and then filter for rows
where destination is RDU or GSO,
and arrival delay or departure delay is less than zero.
Let's see how many flights actually fit this bill.
It looks like there are 6,203
flights that actually fit this bill.
Now let's move on to a type of summarization.
So far, we've taken our data frame,
and we've either worked with the columns or the rows.
But ultimately, every single one of
our results was another data frame
where each row was a flight.
Another thing we might want to do with
dplyr functions is actually summarize our data.
We're asked to create a frequency table of
the destination locations for flights from New York.
Where do flights go from New York?
Let's go ahead and say we want
to start with the flights data frame and
then we want to count
the different destinations from New York.
We have a total of 105 different destinations.
The first one is ABQ.
I believe that's Albuquerque,
so on and so forth,
and we can see that these are in an alphabetical order,
lots and lots of flights from
a New York airport to Atlanta, for example.
If we wanted to see which one was the most common,
we could add another argument called sort TRUE.
This basically would give the destinations,
not in alphabetical order
of their three letter short codes,
but instead in descending order of
magnitude of the number of flights going to that airport.
Next one says, in which month
was there the fewest number of
flights and how many flights were there in that month?
Let's go ahead and say, first,
we want to figure out how many flights per month.
We're going to count the number of
rows associated with each month.
Then we're asked which month
had the fewest number of flights?
I can look through this output.
They're all roughly in the 20,000,
but I can look through this output to try to
figure out which one is the smallest number,
or I can let R help me.
I can pipe this into an arrange and
say that I want my output to be
arranged by the value of N. This gives me
the smallest number on
top and the largest number on the bottom.
The smallest number was February,
had the lowest number of flights out
of one of the three NYC airports.
Finally, on which date,
month and day, was there the largest number of flights?
In this case, what we want to do is we
want to not focus on just month or day,
but we want to focus on a combination of those.
I can do that with flights.
Then we want to count the number of
flights for each combination of month and
day and then we want to arrange them in descending order,
so I can say sort = TRUE.
It looks like the most number of
flights was on November 27th,
that is probably associated with Thanksgiving travel.
So far, we have worked with
our data frame and gotten results where each row of
our data frame was
a single flight and then we've gone into doing a bit of
summarization where we've taken
our flight's data frame and
created frequency tables based
off of that with the COUNT function.
Next, we might want to start getting creative.
What if the variables that are given to us
are not sufficient for our analysis,
or we want to transform them
somehow to get different versions of those variables?
The mutate function, we'll take in a data frame and
mutate that data frame to either add a column,
or overwrite an existing column to change its nature.
The first exercise says,
convert airtime minutes in the air, two hours,
then create a new variable,
MPH, the miles per hour of the flight.
Let's go ahead and again,
start with the flight's data frame,
and then we want to mutate
that data frame to create a new variable.
I will call that variable air_time_hr.
It says, take the original airtime variable
and then divide it by 60.
This is creating a new variable called air_time_hr,
and I can see that that variable is in my data frame.
However, I can actually see the values in it because
it's too far on
the right side to be printed on my output.
Whenever I'm mutating a data frame
and adding new columns,
a function that I find really handy is
relocate which will relocate
any variables you have that may be
elsewhere in the data frame to
the very beginning of your data frame.
Whenever I do that,
I usually relocate any of
the variables that were involved in my calculation.
Now I can see, for example,
that 227 minutes was indeed translates to 3.78 hours,
and I can check myself like this along the way.
We're not going to stop there, though.
It says, and then calculate another variable MPH,
which is the miles per hour of the flight.
First, let's figure out what the distance travel was.
That's going to be in the distance variable,
so I can say and then mutate
again to create a new variable called MPH,
which is going to be the number of
miles divided by the air time in hours.
Then, let's do the relocation as
well to bring to the beginning of our data frame,
again, any of the variables that were
involved in our data pipeline.
Now I can confirm if I
agree with the calculated values for MPH.
One thing we've done here is that sequentially,
we've written to mutate statements.
While this is absolutely valid code,
my recommendation would be after you run
through your data transformation,
to pause for a moment and see,
is there any consolidation that you might make in
your code that might make it easier to read it later.
I would say that let's say we're
creating one variable called air_time,
another variable called mph,
and then I will move my closed parenthesis
to the next line.
This basically does the exact same thing,
but makes it a lot more obvious that there's going to
be two variables that we create along the way.
Generally, once I'm happy with the code,
I might actually go ahead and get rid
of this relocate function so that what
I'm outputting is in
the same order as the data that was going into it.
The next exercise says, first,
count the number of flights each month and then
calculate the proportion of flights for each month,
what proportion of flights take place in July.
Let's start with our flight's data frame again.
We know how to count how many flights were in each month.
But what we're asked to do now is
not just to report the number but the proportion.
To calculate the proportion,
we would take the number and divide it
by the sum of all of the numbers in this column.
We can do exactly that,
and we're going to add a new column.
That's a mutate.
Maybe let's call that prop as the new variables name.
That's going to be the value of n
divided by the sum of n. I'm actually
using an additional function in
my mutate call to do that calculation.
Then it says, what proportion of
flights take place in July?
I can either look at my output here or I can further
filter my data for
where month is equal to the seventh month,
that is July, 8.74% of the flights took place in July.
I can use in addition to
doing summarization by counting things.
I can also use a pipeline to
calculate summary statistics for my data.
Let's go ahead and find
the mean arrival delay for all flights.
I'm again going to start with the flight's data frame,
and then I will
summarize to find the mean arrival delay.
I'm using the mean function from
R to find the arrival delay.
Let's go ahead and run this to see what we get.
There are a couple of things that are
peculiar about this output.
First of all, why is an NA.
Well, in my column of arrival delays,
some of the flights might not
have an arrival delay recorded for them.
If I go ahead and take a look
at the help for the mean function,
I will see that it actually has
an argument called na.rm that I can use.
It's set to false by default.
But if I was to say na.rm = TRUE,
that gives me the mean of all of
the arrival delays if I was to
ignore the ones that were NAs.
Then another peculiar thing yet again is that the name of
my column now is
the exact call that I use to calculate that value.
When we use the summarized function,
just like with mutate,
we can actually name
the summary column that we're going to obtain,
and you are welcome to call it whatever you want to.
But obviously, that's not a great idea.
We want to name things in a short but informative way.
I'm going to call it mean_arr_delay for this.
With summarize, what we've done is we've taken
our whole data frame and reduced it down to a single row,
a single value that summarizes
all of the arrival delays in this data frame.
But what if we wanted
the mean arrival delay for each month?
Let's go ahead and copy this code that we know works for
calculating a single mean arrival delay
for all of our data,
and let's instead say,
before we go there,
let's group the data by a month.
What the group by function does is it groups the data so
that the next step in
the data pipeline is applied once per group.
If I was actually to
only run the first two lines of this code,
you will see that my output looks
exactly like my original data frame.
However, it has this group attribute to it,
saying that it's being group by month,
and there are 12 such groups,
meaning that when I run
the whole group by summarized pipeline,
I'll receive a mean arrival delay per month.
Finally, what's the median departure delay
for each airport around NYC?
That's the origin variable.
Which airport has the shortest mean departure delay?
Let's go ahead and copy
this code that again, we know works.
However, first of all,
we're dealing with the median, not mean.
Let me go ahead and change that
and I'm going to call my summary statistic median.
We're also interested in
departure delay, not arrival delay.
Let's say that's departure delay
is what we're interested in,
and we're not interested in monthly means,
but instead we're interested in means by origin.
The variable that I'm going to group
by is origin as opposed to month.
You can see that we're able to build these things like
little building blocks for each line of my pipeline,
and we're able to take a data frame,
pass it on to the next function,
apply another logic to it
and pass it on to the next function.
What the pipe operator in between
each of these steps is doing is taking
what comes before it and plugging it in
as the first argument in the next function.
