- Understand the goal before editing: work with the `starwars` data frame, focusing on
  categorical variables. Only one package is loaded — tidyverse (a meta-package) — and the
  work centers on ggplot2 for visualizing categorical data.
- Glimpse the data (`glimpse(starwars)`): 87 rows (characters) and 14 columns. Optionally set
  chunk output inline (gear icon). The data dictionary is available via `?starwars` or Help.
- Fix the wording of one prompt: "change color the points by gender" becomes
  "change the color of the points by gender".
- Exercise 2 (color by gender): color is being mapped to a data column, so it goes inside
  aes(). Adding it also produces an automatic legend:
    ggplot(starwars, aes(x = height, y = mass, color = gender)) + ...
  (The plot is mass on y vs. height on x; gender has feminine, masculine, and NA values.)
- Exercise 3 (all points pink): this is a cosmetic *setting*, not an aesthetic *mapping*, so
  it goes in the geom as a character string, not in aes():
    geom_point(color = "pink")
  (Note not every color name is recognized — "pink" works, "dark pink" does not. The key
  distinction: mapping a variable goes in aes(); setting a fixed value goes in the geom.)
- Exercise 4 (labels): layers are joined with `+` (not the pipe), and labels go in labs().
  Add axis units by consulting the documentation (height in cm, mass in kg → "Weight (kg)"),
  and set the legend title by referencing the aesthetic name (`color = "Gender"`). Build the
  labels iteratively — add one, run, check the docs, adjust — rather than aiming for a
  perfect plot on the first try. To merge the shape and color legends, map both to gender and
  give them the same label (NA has no shape, so it drops out):
    ggplot(starwars, aes(x = height, y = mass, color = gender, shape = gender)) +
      geom_point() +
      labs(
        title = "Weights and heights of Star Wars characters",
        x = "Height (cm)",
        y = "Weight (kg)",
        color = "Gender",
        shape = "Gender"
      )
- Replace the `# add code here` placeholders with the bar-chart code:
    - Exercise 5 — bar chart of one categorical variable (identify categoricals via the docs
      or glimpse; hair_color is categorical, height is not). Mapping to y instead of x flips
      the bars, which helps when labels are long; note some characters have multiple hair
      colors:
        ggplot(starwars, aes(y = hair_color)) +
          geom_bar()
    - Exercise 6 — relationship between two categorical variables (sex and gender). Put one on
      x and fill by the other; which orientation to keep depends on which distribution you
      care about (gender within sex, or sex within gender):
        ggplot(starwars, aes(x = sex, fill = gender)) +
          geom_bar()

        ggplot(starwars, aes(x = gender, fill = sex)) +
          geom_bar()
    - Conclusion — bring in a third variable using facets (small multiples). With a small
      sample, adding many variables may not yield much, and reaching a dead end is fine — you
      can always try another split (e.g. facet by hair_color instead of species):
        ggplot(starwars, aes(x = gender, fill = sex)) +
          geom_bar() +
          facet_wrap(~hair_color)

## Complete script from the old video

[MUSIC] In this code along video,
we're going to work with the Star Wars data frame and
specifically focus on categorical variables.
You might not be a Star Wars fan or you might be, but
you've probably heard of the movie franchise nonetheless.
So the packages that we're going to use is only just one.
Remember, the tidyverse package is a meta package that brings along
with it a variety of other packages and we're going to work primarily
with the ggplot2 package now to visualize some categorical data.
But before we go to that, let's go ahead and
take a look at the data that we're going to be working with.
The data set that we're going to be working with is called Star wars.
So let's take a glimpse at it.
You can see that my results are appearing both in my quarto document and
in my console.
I'm going to go ahead and close out of these and click on the gear icon to
say I would prefer to use all of my chunk output in line and remove everything else.
And let's go ahead and run this one more time.
There we go, we have 87 rows.
So that's 87 characters in our Star Wars data frame and 14 columns.
And we know a number of things about them, their name, their hair color,
their gender, the vehicles they've been in, so on and so forth.
Since this data set is distributed with a package as well,
I can access its data dictionary by using the question mark shortcut for
getting to help or going to the help menu and or going to the help menu and
typing the name of the data frame in this box.
And there I can learn all about what each of the variables mean in the data.
The next exercise says modify the following plot to change the color of
the points by gender.
Let's go ahead and run this code first to see what it is that we're getting.
So we are plotting mass, so the weight of the character by their height.
And what we want to do is we want to add a new aesthetic mapping to this as in
we want to take another column from our data frame, which
is the gender column which is the gender role of the character in the movie and
we want to color the points by that.
So since we are taking a column from our data frame and
mapping an aesthetic element to it, this is going to go in the aesthetic function.
So the AES function and I would say, color is equal to gender.
Let's go ahead and run that.
And we can see that we have feminine characters, masculine characters and
some characters with no gender assigned for their roles and
they're indicated by different colors in our data frame.
And by adding that categorical variable to this visualization not only have
we changed the coloring in the points, but
we've also automatically gained a legend that tells us what each color pertains to.
To next, we're asked to modify the plot, that same plot that we had before,
but by changing the color of all points to pink.
So in this case,
we're not bringing in another categorical variable from our data frame.
But instead, we're just making what I might call a cosmetic change to our
plot as opposed to an aesthetic change.
And in that case, since we're not mapping a variable, but
instead setting a color, that is going to go in the geom function and
I can simply pass it on as a character string.
When R recognizes a color by name, RStudio will actually change the color as well.
So you can see what that would look like.
And here, all of my points are pink.
Note that not all color names that you might think of are necessarily going
to be recognized.
So if I was to say dark pink, for example, that's not a color that R is recognizing.
And therefore, the color isn't changing, but pink it does recognize.
So the difference between exercise two and
exercise three is that in exercise two, we were mapping color to gender.
And in exercise three, we are setting color to pink.
Next, we're asked to add labels for
the title and x and y axes and also the color of the point.
So let's go ahead and run this code as well.
This is the same plot we created in exercise two.
Remember that in ggplot between the layers,
we use the plus operator, not the pipe operator.
So we have the plus operator here, and the labels go into the labs function.
The title of my plot,
I can say something like body mass and
heights of Star wars characters.
So that places that text string as the title of my plot.
My x-axis is height and my y-axis is mass.
I might just call it body mass.
And so let's go ahead and run these two.
I've added this information, but that's basically the information
I had that was automatically included as Axis labels, which were, you know,
the names of the variables that I was using in my aesthetic mapping.
But something that would be useful to additionally include here is
what do we mean by height?
What are we measuring it in?
Is it feet and inches?
Is it centimeters?
And in order to be able to answer that question,
we need to go back to the data documentation.
So let's go back to our help and let's take a look to see.
Height is measured in centimeters, so I might put that and
mass is basically the weight of the character.
So maybe to make it a little bit more human friendly to read,
I will change this to say weight in kilograms, and I might update my title and
to say weights and heights of Star wars characters.
Note that I didn't get everything right the first try.
And what I'm doing is instead of trying to build all of the labels up one by one,
I am adding one at a time, running my code, going back to the documentation,
making modification, and running it again.
You should not aspire to get the perfect visualization in the first try.
Instead, hopefully throughout the course,
you will learn to iteratively build up to a visualization that you are happy with.
The one last thing is we may want to update the label for the legend.
I might want to make it title case with g capital, or
I might want to add more information to it.
And in order to be able to do that,
I need to go back to thinking about where did this come from?
So this came from an aesthetic mapping and
the name of the aesthetic element was color.
So just like the name of the aesthetic element for
the x axis was x and for the y axis was y,
those are a little bit more perhaps self evident in this labs function.
If I want to change the title for my legend,
I refer back to my aesthetic mapping and
I can say gender and that updates it as well.
So if I keep adding more aesthetic mappings, let's try one more.
Maybe I don't want to just color the points by gender, but
I also want their shapes to to be updated by gender as well.
Now I can see that I have two separate legends,
one for shape and one for gender.
And if I want to bring them together,
I just need to make sure that they are labeled exactly the same.
And now we've brought them together, basically.
Since there is no shape that can be given to an NA observation,
those actually just sort of went away.
Next, we get to get a little bit more creative in our exploration and
actually explore the variables we might be interested in.
Exercise five says, pick a single categorical variable from the data set and
make a bar plot of its distribution and describe what you see in the plot.
So let's go ahead and
figure out which ones are the categorical variables, how might we go about that?
We can look at the data documentation for their descriptions.
I might go back and bring back my glimpse of my Star wars data set so
that I can take also, a look at each of the observations in my variable so
I can see, for example, that height is not categorical,
it has numerical values, but hair color is.
So why don't we go ahead and work with hair color?
I am going to create a plot, so I start with the ggplot function.
The name of the data set is Star Wars.
And in my aesthetic mapping, I can set x equals to hair color and
the geom that I'm going to use to make a bar plot is geom bar.
So this gives me all of the possible hair colors.
We can see those stretching across the x axis in alphabetical order, and
the heights of these bars indicate how common they are.
There are lots of characters that have no hair,
lots of characters with brown, black or blonde hair.
Those are probably the human characters, maybe even the whites as well.
And there are many, many other colors that you may not necessarily see commonly
that are being represented as hair colors among the Star wars characters.
If I wanted to flip my bar plot around and have the values for
each of the hair color options appear on the y axis as opposed to the x axis,
which can be helpful when you have longer labels for things.
You can simply change the aesthetic mapping to say, y equals hair color.
And now we get to see each of the labels a little bit more clearly as well,
and we can see that some of the characters actually have multiple
hair colors associated with them.
Next, we're asked to pick two categorical variables and
to visualize the relationship between these variables.
So how might we visualize the relationship between two categorical variables?
Let's go ahead and choose our categorical variables.
First, maybe we might take a look at something like sex and gender.
So that's the sex of the character and their gender role in the movie.
We start with Ggplot, the name of our data frame, and
then we need to figure out our aesthetic mappings.
I'm going to not overthink it first and and say x is equal to the first variable
that comes up in line, sex and then let's go ahead and make a bar plot of this.
So these are the sexes that are represented among the Star wars
characters.
Now if we want to see within each of these sexes,
what's the distribution of gender roles?
We can say, I want to fill each of the plots
based on the gender of the character.
So here we can see the distribution.
Alternatively, we can go about it the other way and say, let's go ahead and
copy this code and say, I actually want gender to be represented on the x axis and
sex to be the variable with which I fill my bars.
So that gives me a slightly different visualization,
which one you want really depends on which distribution you're more interested in.
So if we wanted to talk about within given gender roles,
what's the distribution of sexes?
This would be the visualization that we stick with.
If we wanted to talk about gender roles within each of the sexes,
this would be the distribution,
this would be the visualization that we would be sticking with.
And ultimately, the interpretation is going to depend on sort of which
visualization you're interested in, but
I'll leave that up to you to write them up.
To conclude, let's bring in one more categorical variable.
So we're sort of running out of axis with which to sort of to add things in.
We have our x-axis representing one of our categorical variables.
We have filled those bars with the values of another categorical variable.
What would be a way of bringing in a third variable?
One way we could do this would be by now dividing our
visualization into small multiples or what we call facets.
So we can go ahead and pick one of the visualizations we made before and
bring in one more variable with which we facet our visualization.
I'm going to go ahead and
remind myself the variables that we had in our data frame.
Perhaps we may want to pick species as our third variable.
So let's go ahead and say we want to facet.
And since it's a single variable we're faceting by, we can say we want
to facet wrap tilde, the name of the variable we're faceting by.
So that gets me.
Let's go ahead and zoom.
For each of the species represented the distribution of
different sexes and genders.
Now at some point, what we're seeing is that we're sort of
coming to the end of how many ways we can bucket eyes these data in a way.
And at some point, if your sample size is not that large,
we didn't have that many characters to begin with.
And you're bringing in many,
many variables into your exploration, you're not necessarily getting
something that meaningful from the visualization that you produce.
And at that point you might want to say, okay,
maybe this is not necessarily going to give me something all that useful.
I might take my explorer another way, but you would never come up with that
conclusion if you hadn't tried this before.
So don't hesitate to try.
It's not a problem if you sort of come to dead ends with your analysis.
You can always take that back.
So what we can do is we can go back to our visualization and say, well,
maybe we don't want to facet by species.
Maybe I want to facet by hair color.
And maybe that gives me something a little bit more useful that I can use for
my analysis.
