- Understand the goal before editing: explore how bill sizes (bill depth and bill length)
  vary across species, and see what happens when species is not taken into account.
- Note the two packages used: tidyverse (data wrangling and visualization) and
  palmerpenguins (which provides the `penguins` data set).
- Render the document first, before making any changes, to confirm it works out of the box.
- Read and understand the tidyverse startup message before suppressing it:
    - tidyverse is a meta-package that loads nine packages (dplyr, forcats, ggplot2,
      lubridate, purrr, readr, stringr, tibble, tidyr).
    - The conflicts note means `dplyr::filter` masks `stats::filter` and `dplyr::lag` masks
      `stats::lag`; the masked functions are still reachable via the `package::function`
      notation (e.g. `stats::filter`). The `conflicted` package can help manage this.
- Add the chunk option `#| message: false` to the load-packages chunk to suppress that
  startup message in the rendered output (only after reading and understanding it).
- Replace the `# add code here` placeholder in the glimpse chunk with `glimpse(penguins)`
  (344 penguins, 8 columns).
- Concepts demonstrated around the glimpse chunk:
    - Code-chunk labels aid navigation between chunks and are named in error messages.
    - Rendering runs in a separate, reproducible sandbox, so running a single chunk with the
      play button can fail with "could not find function" if earlier chunks (e.g. the
      package-loading chunk) haven't been run; use "Run All Chunks Above" first.
    - Optionally set chunk output to console (gear icon) to keep results out of the document.
- Fix the variable names in both exercise prompts: use `bill_depth_mm` and
  `bill_length_mm` (instead of `bill_depth` and `bill_length`).
- Exercise 1: replace `# add code here` with a scatterplot of bill depth (y) vs. bill length
  (x) plus a line of best fit. Note "y versus x" puts the first variable on the y-axis; the
  standard-error band is turned off with `se = FALSE`, and `method = "lm"` gives the linear
  line of best fit:
    ggplot(penguins, aes(x = bill_length_mm, y = bill_depth_mm)) +
      geom_point() +
      geom_smooth(method = "lm", se = FALSE)
- Exercise 1 interpretation: replace "Add interpretation here." with a note that there is
  a negative, somewhat weak, and roughly linear relationship between bill depth and bill
  length (a surprising result).
- Exercise 2: replace `# add code here` with the same scatterplot colored by species (reuse
  the working code and add the `color = species` aesthetic):
    ggplot(penguins, aes(x = bill_length_mm, y = bill_depth_mm, color = species)) +
      geom_point() +
      geom_smooth(method = "lm", se = FALSE)
- Exercise 2 interpretation: replace "Add interpretation here." with a note that the data
  form three clusters (one per species) and that within each species the relationship is
  positive, moderately strong, and linear.
- Add a closing remark: the second (species-colored) view is more believable, so species
  should be accounted for. This is Simpson's paradox — a relationship reverses once a
  confounding variable (species) is included. The lesson is to consider possible confounders
  and consult domain experts when working with domain-specific data.

## Complete script from the old video

[MUSIC]
Hello, in this code along, we're going to take a first look at Palmer penguins.
That's not entirely true,
we've already looked at Palmer penguins in other course videos.
However, this is going to be the first time we're actually going to be
interacting with this data set.
So I've opened my quarto document titled First Look at Palmer Penguins,
and let's take a look to see what our plan for this codalong is.
We want to explore how bill sizes, so that's the bill depth and
length of the penguin, vary across species.
And also consider what happens if we don't take species into consideration.
We're going to work with two packages, the tidyverse package and
the palmerpenguins package.
The tidyverse package for all the fantastic functionality it provides for
data wrangling and visualization, and
the palmerpenguins package because it has the data set that we need.
And the data set that we're going to visualize is called penguins.
So before I get started with anything else, I'm going to go ahead and
render my quarter document just to make sure that everything works out of the box.
And let's take a look at what our input versus output looks like.
This is a good moment to pause and
talk a little bit about what happens when you load the tidyverse package.
You can see that in this code chunk labeled load-packages.
The first thing I'm doing is loading the tidyverse package, and
when I render my document, I can see a bunch of text being printed.
So let's go ahead and read what this message is telling us.
It says, attaching core tidyverse packages.
Remember, the tidyverse package is a meta package that
houses nine packages at this point in time.
dplyr for data wrangling.
forcats for working with factors.
ggplot2 for data visualization.
lubridate for working with dates.
purrr for iteration.
readr for reading data into R.
stringr for working with character strings.
tibble for the Tidyverse style data frames.
And tidyr for tidying and reshaping your data.
Some of these packages you've already heard about,
some of them are going to come up later on in the course.
Some of them we're not going to work with a whole lot.
The neat thing about the tidyverse package is that by loading that alone you get all
of the functionality of these packages, so you don't have to pause and
keep thinking, I wonder which function this package was in.
Was it a data visualization thing or a data wrangling thing?
And sometimes they will be more obvious than others.
In addition to that, we also have some information on conflicts.
So what do conflicts mean in this case?
It says that the filter function in dplyr masks, so
you can think of it as like it overwrites in a way, or
the filter function in the stats package.
What in the world is the stats package?
We haven't loaded it.
So why is it there?
Well, the stats factor package is part of base r.
It's distributed with R and it has functions,
statistical functions that you've been accustomed to using without worrying about
what package they're in, like mean, and median, and correlation.
So all these functions that you commonly use are actually provided with the stats
package.
However, it also happens to have a function called filter.
So now when we load dplyr as well, the dplyr filter takes over.
So going forward, because dplyr is the package that's been
loaded after the stats package, when I refer to filter,
it's going to try to use the filter function from dplyr.
And if I needed to use the stats version,
then I would give the name of the package :: the name of the function.
So this notation of package name :: function name is something
you might come across in documentation you read online.
Or if you go on stack overflow or ask chat GPT, how do I do so and so?
It might be something that comes up.
And basically what it's referring to is state the package name and
then state the function name.
We don't necessarily need to do that while we're writing interactive code, but
if one day you are writing R packages yourself or
writing code that others run or that gets run in an automated setting,
this might be the type of thing you pay more attention to at that time.
And another one like this is the lag function in dplyr that's
masking the lag function in the stats package.
So it's not overwriting it in the sense that we no longer have access to these
filter and lag functions from the stats package, but they're not going to be
prioritized, and if we want to use them, we'll have to specifically ask for them.
And then it gives you some information about another package called conflicted
that could help you resolve these sorts of conflicts.
We're not going to go there right now, we'll just say thank you for
letting us know.
The reason why I wanted to take a little bit of time going through this is this.
You're going to see this message so many times that it's human nature to
sort of ignore it after some time, and that is totally fine.
This is one of those messages where it's important to understand what it does.
And if you ever find yourself in a situation where r is
telling you something like I can't find the right filter function or
something, you might think back to this moment and ask yourself, I wonder if
it has something to do with the conflict between dplyr and stats versions.
But otherwise it's probably not the sort of thing that you want to be reading
every single time.
It's also probably not the sort of thing that you want printed out as
part of your final output.
So code chunk options allow us to hide this sort of information.
So for this particular code chunk, I'm going to add a new option.
These options, remember, need to follow the hash pipe.
This is going to be the message.
And I want to say that I want to turn messages off, and
I'm using RStudio's autofill as opposed to typing these myself.
Soon as I started typing mes, it filled it in for me saying,
well, one of the code chunk options that start with that is message,
and the two values it can take are true and false.
They're true by default, I am turning it to false for this particular code chunk.
It's like a superpower.
You can suppress these messages, but
you want to make sure that you read them first and understand what they say and
sort of be actively deciding that by suppressing it,
I am not misleading myself or anyone who might be reading my analysis.
All right, then it says the data set we will visualize is called penguins.
Let's glimpse at it.
So we have a new code chunk here with a code chunk label called glimpse.
Why do we have these labels by the way?
One of the nice uses of these labels is that if you go to the bottom
of your editor in RStudio, you'll be able to see that when
chunks have labels in them, we actually can navigate within
our document easily by sort of jumping between these chunks.
So if I had a really, really lengthy analysis and
I want to do something like I want to go back to where I calculated something and
maybe change my code, it's an easy way of navigating.
Another reason is that if you have an error in your code, so
let's go ahead and make a mistake, we know by now that if.
If we want to glimpse at a data frame, we would say glimpse, and
then give the name of the data frame.
And if I just render this, I should be able to see the results.
I have 344 penguins, eight columns about them,
and here are the variables in this data set.
But let's go ahead and make a mistake.
Let's go ahead and forget to close the parenthesis and render again.
In this Background Jobs pane, we have some information.
This information is also repeated in my viewer window as well.
Some of the information is helpful, and some of it, frankly,
is a little bit cryptic.
So let's start by reading here, Quitting from lines 25 to 27.
What is this referring to, 25 to 27?
It's hard for us to know what it's referring to
because we're using the visual mode in RStudio right now,
which doesn't show us the code chunk labels.
The nice thing is it allows us to do neat things like, you know, use our editor,
just like we might use something like Google Docs or whatever.
But if I actually switch over to the source code for a second,
I can then see the line numbers, and
25 to 27 refers to this particular code chunk, which hopefully
we're not surprised by because we knew that we made a mistake there.
But you may want to keep things in the visual editor.
That's usually how I use it, and
that's how you're going to see these code alongs go.
Here we go.
We have a little bit of information that might help us identify which code
chunk it is.
So if you label your code chunks and you need to troubleshoot, there's an error,
the error message will mention your code chunk label as well.
You can imagine if this wasn't an error you made intentionally, but
an error in a really lengthy document that you're having difficulty sort of
like pinpointing where to look at, this could be very helpful.
Let's go ahead and close that parenthesis and
render our document one more time.
Now, before we go into the visualization, I'm going to do one more thing.
What if I click on this little play button here?
It is so attractive.
It says come click on me, and it allows me to run the current code chunk.
It's also really handy because if I have a long quarto document,
I may not want to constantly render the document with every little thing I do.
I might just want to run a single code chunk.
Let's go ahead and run it, and I get an error.
The document was just rendering.
We can do that one more time and
sort of like convince ourselves that my document is working.
However, when I go to run this code chunk, I get an error.
So why am I getting this error?
The reason is that when you render your document, Quarto will run all of
the code up to that point, including anything that comes before it.
Which is the code chunk where we load our packages, the package where
the glimpse function lives, the package where the penguins data frame lives.
So right now, we're getting an error that says, could not find function "glimpse".
Whenever you get one of these could not find errors, especially if it's about
a function, your brain should immediately go to, I may not have loaded the package.
And in fact, we did not load the package in our working environment right now.
Our Quarto document, when we render it,
has a sort of a sandbox separate working environment.
And the reason for that is that we want the whole document to be reproducible.
We don't want it to be affected by anything else that might be happening sort
of in our console, in our current working environment.
But that also means that anything that's in the cordo document,
if I want to sort of replicate it in my current working environment,
I need to make sure that I run all relevant code there as well.
So a thing that I can do is either explicitly run any code chunks
that come before it, or I can click on this down arrow that
says run all chunks above and then run this one as well.
And now that the package has been loaded in my working environment,
I actually can see the result of the glimpse function.
Personally, I am not a fan of my results showing up in my document, so
I'm going to go ahead and make one more adjustment.
I am going to click on the gear icon and say I want to see the chunk output in
console, remove any output that already has been put there and
let's try running this again.
And I can see the result in my console.
Okay, so let's go ahead and start making some visualizations.
The first question says, create a scatterplot of bill_depth_mm,
that's the name of the variable, versus bill_length_mms of penguins.
So when we say something versus something,
that first one goes on the y axis, and the second one goes on the x axis.
And then we are to overlay a line of best fit and
describe the relationship between the two variables.
Because we're making a plot, we're going to start with ggplot.
The name of our data set is penguins.
And then in my aesthetic mappings,
I'm going to say x is the bill length variable,
and y is the bill depth variable.
And then I want to represent my data with point, so I will say geom_point.
Let's go ahead and run this.
This is what the visualization looks like.
It does look like a bit of a blob, to be perfectly honest.
Sometimes reducing your sort of plotting
window to have a better aspect ratio might be helpful in trying to figure out
what the relationship between these two variables would be.
It also says to overlay a line of best fit.
So in addition to using points to represent our data,
we also want to use a line, a line of best fit,
a smooth line to represent it as well.
We can do this by adding a new layer, a smooth layer.
And because it says that we want a line of best fit,
we don't just want it to be a smooth curve,
that ggplot2 sort of like decides what the best smooth curve here is.
But instead we want to set the method to LM linear model we're going
to say a lot more about linear models later on in the specialization,
but for now, just know that LM, or
in other words linear model, refers to the line of best fit.
So let's go ahead and run that.
And what do we see?
Here's our linear model.
The band around this line is a measure of uncertainty called standard error.
Another thing we're going to introduce a bit later in the specialization.
We can actually turn that off for now since we're not going to,
since that's not going to be part of our discussion.
And here's the line of best fit.
So how would we describe the relationship between the depth and
lengths of bills for these penguins?
That line is trending downwards,
which says that there is a negative
relationship between bill depth and the length.
The relationship Is somewhat weak, I would say.
There's a lot of scatter around that line.
And is it linear?
It does seem somewhat linear.
This is surprising, though.
Why would we expect that as the length of a penguin's
bill increases, the depth decreases?
Let's move on to the second question and see what it's asking us to do.
It says, create a scatter plot of bill depth and bill length of penguins again.
But this time, we want to color it by species, and
then we want to overlay a line of best fit as well, and
then describe the relationship between the two variables for each of the species.
So I'm going to go ahead and
cheat in the sense that I know that I have some code that works.
I'm going to take that and paste it here.
But I need one more aesthetic mapping.
Color should be mapped to species.
And let's go ahead and run this.
Now, what do we see?
There happen to be actually three clusters of points, one for each of the species.
And we can see that within each of the species,
the relationship between bill depth and bill length is positive.
So let's go ahead and note that.
There is a positive relationship
between bill depth and bill length for
each of the three species.
The relationships are moderately strong.
Within each one of these clusters, there's not a whole lot of scatter anymore,
and each one of them actually appear linear as well.
So if we now go back and reflect on the seemingly
contradictory findings, what might be going on?
And which one do you believe more?
Well, personally, it makes sense to me that a physical measurement on a penguin,
a penguin's bill, its length and its depth would be positively associated.
If one grows, the other should be growing as well.
What is happening, though, is that the relationship between these two variables,
as well as sort of the magnitudes or the sizes of these measurements of bill
length and bill depth, are pretty different for each one of the species.
So when we clump everything together,
we sort of lose the positive relationship that is apparent.
So which one do we believe more?
I believe the second one more.
We should be considering species
when analyzing the relationship
between bill depth and
bill length for penguins.
This is called Simpson's paradox, where you have a relationship that's
apparent between two variables, and when you bring a third variable in, often
referred to as the confounding variable, the relationship changes entirely.
It is not that we did something wrong in the first question, however.
It is that we did not consider a variable that is an important factor in this
relationship.
How could we have known that it is an important factor.
You're not expected to know anything about penguin anatomies to be able to learn data
science.
However, you are always expected to think about if there may be other
confounding variables, and make sure that as you analyze your data,
you bring these other variables in and take a look to see how they change
your conclusions, if they change your conclusions.
And the other thing is that if you're working with a domain specific dataset,
it's always a good idea to consult with someone who is an expert in that domain.
And I bet if we were to talk to folks who actually study penguins,
they would tell us that they would expect to see some differences across species,
and that any analysis we're doing should probably consider species as
a variable in the analysis.
